.TH SAGE\-PLUGIN\-API 3 "2026-03-05" "sage 0.1.0" "Library Functions Manual"
.SH NAME
sage\-plugin\-api \- JavaScript plugin API for sage
.SH SYNOPSIS
Plugins are ES modules loaded from the plugins directory:
.PP
.nf
\fI~/.config/sage/plugins/10-example.js\fR

import fs from 'sage:fs'

on('open', ({ path, tab, tab_count }) => {
  console.info('open', path, tab, tab_count)
})

command('hello', async (args) => {
  console.log('hello', args)
  exec(':42')
})
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBsage\fR(1) can load JavaScript plugins powered by QuickJS.
Each plugin runs in its own QuickJS runtime/context and is evaluated as an ES module (ESM).
Plugins are loaded only in interactive TUI sessions (when \fBstdout\fR is a TTY).
.PP
Plugins can:
.IP \(bu 2
listen for host events (open, tab changes, searches, copy, quit),
.IP \(bu 2
register custom \fB:\fR commands,
.IP \(bu 2
execute host commands,
.IP \(bu 2
perform bounded filesystem I/O (plugin state + currently open local files),
.IP \(bu 2
run bounded child processes,
.IP \(bu 2
make HTTP(S) requests via a WHATWG\-style \fBfetch()\fR.
.SH LOADING
At startup, \fBsage\fR loads \fB*.js\fR plugins in lexicographic order from:
.IP 1. 3
\fB\-\-plugins\-dir\fR \fIPATH\fR / \fB.sagerc\fR \fBplugins_dir\fR (if set and \fBSAGE_PLUGINS_DIR\fR is not set),
.IP 2. 3
\fBSAGE_PLUGINS_DIR\fR,
.IP 3. 3
\fBXDG_CONFIG_HOME\fR/\fBsage/plugins\fR (usually \fI~/.config/sage/plugins\fR),
.IP 4. 3
\fI$HOME/.config/sage/plugins\fR.
.PP
Disable plugins:
.IP \(bu 2
\fBSAGE_NO_PLUGINS=1\fR, or
.IP \(bu 2
\fB\-\-no\-plugins\fR, or
.IP \(bu 2
\fB.sagerc\fR \fBplugins = false\fR.
.SH MODULES
Plugins are evaluated as ES modules:
.IP \(bu 2
\fBimport ... from 'sage:...'\fR imports built\-in modules provided by the host.
.IP \(bu 2
Relative imports are allowed only for filesystem modules under the plugin's directory tree.
Bare imports are rejected.
.IP \(bu 2
Relative imports from \fBsage:*\fR modules are rejected.
.IP \(bu 2
Top\-level \fBawait\fR is not supported; plugins using it are disabled at load time.
.SH GLOBALS
The plugin bootstrap extends \fBglobalThis\fR with browser\-like primitives.
.SS Runtime Detection
.TP
.B isSageRuntime
A stable getter that returns \fBtrue\fR.
.SS Events
.TP
.B EventTarget
.TP
.B Event
.TP
.B CustomEvent
.TP
.B MessageEvent
Minimal DOM\-style event types.
.PP
The host dispatches events as \fBCustomEvent\fR instances; the payload is carried in \fBev.detail\fR.
.TP
.B addEventListener(type, fn)
.TP
.B removeEventListener(type, fn)
.TP
.B dispatchEvent(ev)
EventTarget methods bound to an internal event bus.
.TP
.B on(type, fn)
.TP
.B once(type, fn)
.TP
.B off(type, fn)
Convenience helpers that call \fBfn(payload)\fR where payload is:
.IP \(bu 2
\fBCustomEvent.detail\fR, or
.IP \(bu 2
\fBMessageEvent.data\fR.
.SS Console
.TP
.B console
An instance of \fBConsole\fR with methods:
\fBlog\fR, \fBinfo\fR, \fBwarn\fR, \fBerror\fR, \fBverbose\fR, \fBdebug\fR.
Output is written to the plugin log (see \fBENVIRONMENT\fR).
.PP
Logging is gated by \fBSAGE_CONSOLE_LEVEL\fR:
.IP \(bu 2
\fBsilent\fR/\fBnone\fR/\fBoff\fR disables logging,
.IP \(bu 2
\fBerror\fR, \fBwarn\fR, \fBinfo\fR/\fBlog\fR, \fBverbose\fR, \fBdebug\fR set a threshold,
.IP \(bu 2
numeric levels \fB\-1\fR..\fB4\fR are also accepted.
.PP
If \fBSAGE_CONSOLE_LEVEL\fR is unset, the default threshold is \fBwarn\fR (or \fBdebug\fR when \fBsage\fR is started with \fB\-\-verbose\fR).
.SS Timers
.TP
.B queueMicrotask(fn)
.TP
.B setTimeout(fn, ms, ...)
.TP
.B clearTimeout(id)
.TP
.B setInterval(fn, ms, ...)
.TP
.B clearInterval(id)
.TP
.B sleep(ms)
Timers are host\-backed.
Callbacks are subject to the per\-event execution budget (see \fBLIMITS\fR).
.SS Commands
.TP
.B command(name, fn)
Register a custom \fB:\fR command.
The command name is normalized (trimmed, lowercased).
The handler is invoked as \fBfn(args)\fR where \fIargs\fR is the command tail as a string.
Handlers may be async.
.TP
.B exec(cmd)
Enqueue a host command for execution.
\fIcmd\fR may include a leading \fB:\fR.
Returns \fBtrue\fR on successful enqueue.
.SS Navigator
.TP
.B navigator
A browser\-like \fBNavigator\fR instance (also available via \fBsage:navigator\fR) with:
.IP \(bu 2
\fBnavigator.appName\fR,
.IP \(bu 2
\fBnavigator.appVersion\fR,
.IP \(bu 2
\fBnavigator.userAgent\fR.
.SH BUILT\-IN MODULES
The host provides built\-in ES modules under the \fBsage:\fR namespace.
.TP
.B sage:fs
Bounded filesystem I/O.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBdataDir()\fR \- returns the plugin data directory path.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBexists(path)\fR \- returns \fBtrue\fR if \fIpath\fR exists and is readable by the plugin sandbox.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBreadFile(path, opts?)\fR \- reads a currently open local file (or a file under the plugin data dir).
\fIopts\fR may be \fB'utf8'\fR/\fB'utf-8'\fR or \fB{ encoding: 'utf8', maxBytes }\fR.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBreadDataFile(name, opts?)\fR \- reads a file from the plugin data directory by relative name.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBwriteFile(name, data)\fR / \fBappendFile(name, data)\fR \- write/append a file in the plugin data directory.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBreaddir()\fR \- list files in the plugin data directory.
.IP
Reads default to 256KiB and are capped at 4MiB.
Writes are capped at 4MiB per call.
.TP
.B sage:path
Minimal POSIX\-style path helpers:
\fBisAbsolute\fR, \fBnormalize\fR, \fBjoin\fR, \fBdirname\fR, \fBbasename\fR, \fBextname\fR, \fBresolve\fR.
.TP
.B sage:process
Process helpers:
.IP \(bu 2
\fBpid\fR, \fBppid\fR,
.IP \(bu 2
\fBcwd()\fR,
.IP \(bu 2
\fBexec(cmd, { timeoutMs?, maxBytes? }?)\fR \- run \fB/bin/sh \-c\fR \fIcmd\fR.
.IP
\fBexec()\fR resolves with:
.IP
\fB{ code, stdout, stderr, timedOut, truncated, signal }\fR.
.IP
On timeout or truncation, it rejects with an Error object carrying the same properties.
.TP
.B sage:env
Environment variable helpers:
\fBget(name)\fR, \fBset(name, value, { overwrite? }?)\fR, \fBunset(name)\fR.
.TP
.B sage:navigator
Exports the \fBnavigator\fR instance (default export) and \fBNavigator\fR (named export).
.TP
.B sage:performance
\fBperformance.now()\fR and \fBperformance.timeOrigin\fR (plus \fBinstallGlobals()\fR).
.TP
.B sage:crypto
\fBcrypto.getRandomValues(...)\fR and \fBcrypto.randomUUID()\fR (plus \fBinstallGlobals()\fR).
.TP
.B sage:uuid
UUID helpers:
\fBv4()\fR and \fBv7([unixMs])\fR.
.TP
.B sage:url
WHATWG\-style \fBURL\fR and \fBURLSearchParams\fR (plus \fBinstallGlobals()\fR).
.TP
.B sage:core/dom
DOM core helpers:
\fBDOMException\fR and \fBstructuredClone\fR (plus \fBinstallGlobals()\fR).
.TP
.B sage:core/web
Host\-free WHATWG\-style web primitives:
\fBHeaders\fR, \fBRequest\fR, \fBResponse\fR, \fBFormData\fR, \fBBlob\fR, \fBReadableStream\fR,
\fBAbortController\fR, \fBAbortSignal\fR, \fBTextEncoder\fR, \fBTextDecoder\fR (plus \fBinstallGlobals()\fR).
.TP
.B sage:fetch
WHATWG\-style \fBfetch\fR backed by the native host (plus \fBinstallGlobals()\fR).
.IP
Extra options on \fBfetch(input, init)\fR:
.IP \(bu 2
\fBtimeoutMs\fR (default: 30000),
.IP \(bu 2
\fBmaxBytes\fR (default: 16777216),
.IP \(bu 2
\fBfollowRedirects\fR (default: true).
.SH EVENTS
Host events are delivered as \fBCustomEvent\fR instances.
When using \fBon\fR/\fBonce\fR, handlers receive the payload directly.
.TP
.B open
\fB{ path, tab, tab_count }\fR.
.TP
.B tab_change
\fB{ from, to, tab_count }\fR.
.TP
.B search
\fB{ query, regex, ignore_case }\fR.
.TP
.B copy
\fB{ bytes }\fR (copied selection bytes).
.TP
.B quit
No payload.
.SH LIMITS
For robustness, plugin execution is bounded.
When a plugin exceeds a limit, \fBsage\fR disables only that plugin for the rest of the session.
.TP
.B SAGE_PLUGIN_LOAD_TIMEOUT_MS
Plugin bootstrap/load execution budget in milliseconds (default: 500).
.TP
.B SAGE_PLUGIN_EVENT_TIMEOUT_MS
Per\-event execution budget in milliseconds (default: 50).
.TP
.B SAGE_PLUGIN_MEM_LIMIT_MB
QuickJS memory limit in MiB (default: 64).
.TP
.B SAGE_PLUGIN_STACK_LIMIT_KB
QuickJS stack limit in KiB (default: 1024).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SAGE_PLUGINS_DIR
Override the plugins directory.
.TP
.B SAGE_NO_PLUGINS
If set, disables plugin loading (safe mode).
.TP
.B SAGE_PLUGIN_LOG
Override the plugin log file path.
.TP
.B SAGE_PLUGIN_LOG_STDERR
If set, write plugin logs to \fBstderr\fR (debug only; may corrupt the TUI).
.TP
.B SAGE_CONSOLE_LEVEL
Console threshold (see \fBGLOBALS\fR).
.TP
.B SSL_CERT_FILE
Path to a PEM CA bundle used by HTTPS fetch.
.TP
.B SAGE_FETCH_INSECURE
If set to a non\-zero value, disables HTTPS certificate verification.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/sage/plugins/
Default plugins directory.
.TP
.I ~/.cache/sage/plugins.log
Default plugin log file.
.TP
.I ~/.local/state/sage/plugins/
Default plugin data root directory (\fBXDG_STATE_HOME\fR overrides).
.PP
Each plugin gets its own data directory based on its filename (sanitized, \fB.js\fR removed).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Log all host events
.PP
.nf
\fI~/.config/sage/plugins/00-log-events.js\fR

on('open', (p) => console.info('open', p))
on('tab_change', (p) => console.info('tab_change', p))
on('search', (p) => console.info('search', p))
on('copy', (p) => console.info('copy', p.bytes && p.bytes.length))
on('quit', () => console.info('quit'))
.fi
.TP
Register a command
.PP
.nf
command('hi', async (args) => {
  console.log('hi', args)
})
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBsage\fR(1), \fBsage\fR(7)
