.TH SAGE 7 "2026-03-05" "sage 0.1.0" "Miscellaneous Information Manual"
.SH NAME
sage \- concepts, configuration, and security notes
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBsage\fR(1) is a terminal pager focused on fast navigation, incremental search, and an ergonomic TUI.
This page documents higher\-level concepts: inputs, tabs, syntax selection, configuration, and plugin/runtime behavior.
.SH INPUTS
\fBsage\fR can open:
.IP \(bu 2
local file paths,
.IP \(bu 2
directories (expanded to direct child files; non\-recursive),
.IP \(bu 2
stdin (use \fB\-\fR, or pipe into \fBsage\fR),
.IP \(bu 2
network paths: \fBhttp://\fR, \fBhttps://\fR, and \fBssh://\fR.
.PP
When stdin is a pipe, \fBsage\fR reads keys from \fI/dev/tty\fR so it remains interactive.
.PP
Network paths are treated as read\-only content.
For syntax selection, \fBsage\fR ignores URL query strings and fragments.
If a URL path has no usable extension, \fBsage\fR may use the HTTP \fBContent\-Type\fR header as a syntax hint.
.SH TABS
Opening multiple inputs creates a tab bar.
Tabs are 1\-indexed; \fB0\fR selects the last tab.
See \fBsage\fR(1) for tab keybindings and \fB:\fR commands.
.SH SEARCH VS FIND
.SS Search (within one tab)
\fB/\fR (or \fBCtrl\-F\fR) starts incremental search within the active tab.
Use \fBn\fR and \fBp\fR for next/previous match.
.SS Find (across open tabs)
\fBCtrl\-K\fR opens a "find" modal that searches across currently open tabs.
.PP
For local file tabs, \fBsage\fR shells out to an external tool (see \fBFIND TOOL\fR).
For network tabs, \fBsage\fR scans the in\-memory content internally.
.PP
Selecting a result (Enter or click) jumps to the file and location and highlights the selected match in the destination tab.
.SS Find Tool
The find tool is configurable via \fB.sagerc\fR \fBfind_cmd\fR.
If unset, \fBsage\fR uses a smart default:
.IP \(bu 2
if \fBrg\fR exists: \fBrg \-\-vimgrep \-\- <query> <...files>\fR
.IP \(bu 2
else if \fBag\fR exists: \fBag \-\-vimgrep \-\- <query> <...files>\fR
.IP \(bu 2
else if \fBslg\fR exists: \fBslg \-\- <query> <...files>\fR
.IP \(bu 2
else: \fBgrep \-inH \-\- <query> <...files>\fR
.PP
Find output is parsed as either \fBvimgrep\fR (\fIpath:line:col:text\fR) or grep\-style (\fIpath:line:text\fR) so result navigation can jump precisely.
.SH SYNTAX SELECTION
When syntax highlighting is enabled, \fBsage\fR selects a syntax key using (in order):
.IP 1. 3
\fBsyntax_map\fR overrides from \fB.sagerc\fR,
.IP 2. 3
compiled syntax index matches for the path (including "first\-line" patterns from syntax sources),
.IP 3. 3
a network syntax hint (for example from HTTP \fBContent\-Type\fR) when available.
.PP
For network paths, query strings and fragments do not participate in syntax selection.
.SH SYNTAX CACHE LAYOUT
\fBsage\fR uses compiled syntax caches:
.IP \(bu 2
User cache: \fBXDG_CACHE_HOME\fR/\fBsage/syntax\fR (default: \fI~/.cache/sage/syntax\fR)
.IP \(bu 2
User sources: \fBXDG_CONFIG_HOME\fR/\fBsage/syntax\fR (default: \fI~/.config/sage/syntax\fR)
.PP
\fBsage \-\-compile\-cache\fR compiles user sources into the user cache.
.PP
For portability, \fBsage\fR also supports "bundled" syntax caches:
.IP \(bu 2
Build layout: \fI<root>/bin/sage\fR with \fI<root>/syntax/\fR next to it
.IP \(bu 2
Installed layout: \fI<prefix>/bin/sage\fR with \fI<prefix>/share/sage/syntax/\fR
.PP
To override cache lookup explicitly, set \fBSAGE_SYNTAX_CACHE_DIR\fR.
.SH CONFIGURATION
\fBsage\fR reads \fB.sagerc\fR (TOML) unless \fB\-\-no\-rc\fR is provided.
Order:
.IP 1. 3
\fBSAGERC\fR (explicit path via env var)
.IP 2. 3
\fI./.sagerc\fR
.IP 3. 3
\fI$HOME/.sagerc\fR
.PP
Command line flags always override config values.
See \fB.sagerc.example\fR for supported keys.
.SH PLUGINS
\fBsage\fR can load JavaScript plugins (QuickJS) for automation and customization.
Plugin scripts are loaded only in interactive TUI sessions and can register events and custom \fB:\fR commands.
.PP
See \fBsage\-plugin\-api\fR(3) for the runtime surface, built\-in modules, events, and limits.
.SH SECURITY
By default, \fBsage\fR sanitizes control bytes to reduce terminal injection risk.
It can optionally pass through ANSI SGR sequences (for colored \fBman\fR output and diffs).
.PP
\fB\-\-raw\fR disables sanitization and may execute terminal control sequences from content; use it only on trusted input.
.SH DISTRIBUTION
The \fIbuild/\fR directory is intended to be distributable.
It contains the \fBsage\fR binary, bundled syntax caches, and an installation Makefile.
.PP
Typical installation from a build directory:
.PP
.nf
make \-C build install PREFIX=/usr/local
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBsage\fR(1), \fBsage\-plugin\-api\fR(3)
